# 81. The Root Cause of Fear

><span style=font-style:normal>Karma</a> is only a store of unspent 
energies, of unfulfilled desires and fears not understood. The store is being 
constantly replenished by new desires and fears. It need not be so forever. 
Understand the root cause of your fears — estrangement from yourself; and of 
desires — the longing for the self, and your <span 
style=font-style:normal>karma</a> will dissolve like a dream…</p>

<p><b>Maharaj:</b> Where do you come from?</p>

<p><b>Questioner:</b> I am from the United States, but I live mostly in Europe. 
I came to India recently. I was in Rishikesh, in two *ashram*s. I was taught 
meditation and breathing.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> How long were you there?</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Eight days in one, six days in another. I was not happy there and 
I left. Then for three weeks I was with the Tibetan *lama*s. But they were all 
wrapped up in formulas and rituals.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> And what was the net result of it all?</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> There was definitely an increase of energy. But before I left for 
Rishikesh, I did some fasting and dieting at a nature cure sanatorium at 
Pudukkotai in south India. It has done me enormous good.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Maybe the access to energy was due to better health.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> I cannot say. But as a result of all these attempts, some fires 
started burning in various places in my body and I heard chants and voices 
where there were none.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> And what are you after now?</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Well, what are we all after? Some truth, some inner certainty, 
some real happiness. In the various schools of self-realisation there is so 
much talk of awareness that one ends with the impression that awareness itself 
is the supreme reality. Is it so? The body is looked after by the brain; the 
brain is illumined by consciousness; awareness watches over consciousness; is 
there anything beyond awareness?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> How do you know that you are aware?</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> I feel that I am. I cannot express it otherwise.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> When you follow it up carefully from brain through consciousness 
to awareness, you find that the sense of duality persists. When you go beyond 
awareness, there is a state of non-duality in which there is no cognition, 
only pure being — which may as well be called ‘non-being’, if by ‘being’ you 
mean ‘being something in particular’.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> What you call ‘pure being’ — is it universal being, being 
everything?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Everything implies a collection of particulars. In pure being the 
very idea of the particular is absent.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Is there any relationship between pure being and particular being?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> What relationship can there be between what *is* and what merely 
appears to be? Is there any relationship between the ocean and its waves? The 
real enables the unreal to appear and causes it to disappear. The succession 
of transient moments creates the illusion of time, but the timeless reality of 
pure being is not in movement, for all movement requires a motionless 
background. It is itself the background. Once you have found it in yourself, 
you know that you had never lost that independent being, independent of all 
divisions and separations. But don’t look for it in
consciousness, you will not find it there. Don’t look for it anywhere, for 
nothing contains it. On the contrary, it contains everything and manifests 
everything. It is like the daylight that makes everything visible while itself 
remaining invisible.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Sir, of what use to me is your telling me that reality cannot be 
found in consciousness? Where else am I to look for it? How do you apprehend 
it?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> It is quite simple. If I ask you what is the taste of your mouth, 
all you can do is to say, “It is neither
sweet nor bitter, nor sour nor astringent; it is what remains when all these 
tastes are not”. Similarly, when all distinctions and reäctions are no more, 
what remains is reality, simple and solid.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> All that I understand is that I am in the grip of a beginningless 
illusion. And I do not see how it can come to an end. If it could, it would — 
long ago. I must have had as many opportunities in the past as I shall have in 
the future. What could not happen cannot happen. Or, if it did, it could not 
last. Our very deplorable state after all these untold millions of years 
carries, at best, the promise of ultimate extinction or, which is worse, the 
threat of an endless and meaningless repetition.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> What proof have you that your present state is beginningless and 
endless? How were you before you were born? How will you be after death? And 
of your present state — how much do you know? You do not know even what your 
condition was before you woke up this morning. You only know a little of your 
present state and from it you draw conclusions for all times and places. You 
may just be dreaming and imagining your dream to be eternal.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Calling it a dream does not change the situation. I repeat my 
question: What hope is left which the eternity behind me could not fulfill? 
Why should my future be different from my past?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> In your fevered state, you project a past and a future and take 
them to be real. In fact, you know only your present moment. Why not 
investigate what is now instead of questioning the imaginary past and future? 
Your present state is neither beginningless nor endless. It is over in a 
flash. Watch carefully from where it comes and where it goes. You will soon 
discover the timeless reality behind it.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Why have I not done it before?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Just as every wave subsides into the ocean, so does every moment 
return to its source. Realisation consists in discovering the source and 
abiding there.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Who discovers?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> The mind discovers.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Does it find the answers?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> It finds that it is left without questions, that no answers are 
needed.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Being born is a fact. Dying is another fact. How do they appear to 
the witness?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> A child was born, a man has died — just events in the course of 
time.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Is there any progress in the witness? Does awareness evolve?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> What is seen may undergo many changes when the light of awareness 
is focussed on it, but it is the object that changes, not the light. Plants 
grow in sunlight, but the sun does not grow. By themselves both the body and 
the witness are motionless, but when brought together in the mind, both appear 
to move.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Yes, I can see that what moves and changes is the ‘I am’ only. Is 
the ‘I am’ needed at all?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Who needs it? It is there — now. It had a beginning, it will have 
an end.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> What remains when the ‘I am’ goes?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> What does not come and go remains. It is the ever-greedy mind that 
creates ideas of progress and evolution towards perfection. It disturbs and 
talks of order, destroys and seeks security.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Is there progress in destiny, in <a href="Action 
or “the fruits of action”. <em>Karma</em> is of three kinds: <em>sanchita</em> 
(accumulated from previous births), <em>prarabdha</em> (portion of the past 
<em>karma</em> to be worked out in the present life) and <em>agami</em> (the 
current <em>karma</em> the result of which will fructify in 
future).">karma</a>?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> *Karma* is only a store of unspent energies, of unfulfilled 
desires and fears not understood. The store is being constantly replenished by 
new desires and fears. It need not be so for ever. Understand the root cause 
of your fears — estrangement from yourself; and of desires — the longing for 
the self; and your *karma* will dissolve like a dream. Between earth and 
heaven, life goes on. Nothing is affected, only bodies grow and decay.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> Between the person and the witness, what is the relation?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> There can be no relation between them because they are one. Don’t 
separate and don’t look for a relationship.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> If the seer and the seen are one, how did the separation occur?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Fascinated by names and forms, which are by their very nature 
distinct and diverse, you distinguish what is natural and separate what is 
one. The world is rich in diversity, but your feeling strange and frightened 
is due to misapprehension. It is the body that is in danger, not you.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> I can see that the basic biological anxiety, the flight instinct, 
takes many shapes and distorts my thoughts and feelings. But how did this 
anxiety come into being?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> It is a mental state caused by the ‘I am the body’ idea. It can be 
removed by the contrary idea, ‘I am 
not the body’. Both the ideas are false, but one removes the other. Realise 
that no ideas are your own; they all come to you from outside. You must think 
it all out for yourself; become yourself the object of your meditation. The 
effort to understand yourself is <a href="One of the six 
systems of the Hindu philosophy (from <em>yoj</em>, to yoke or join). 
<em>Yoga</em> teaches the means by which the individual spirit 
(<em>jivatma</em>) can be joined or united with the universal spirit 
(<em>Paramatma</em>).">yoga</a>. Be a <a href="One who 
practices <em>yoga</em>.">yogi</a>, give your life to it — brood, wonder, 
search, till you come to the root of error and to the truth beyond the error.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> In meditation, who meditates — the person or the witness?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Meditation is a deliberate attempt to pierce into the higher 
states of consciousness and finally go beyond them. The art of meditation is 
the art of shifting the focus of attention to ever subtler levels without 
losing one’s grip on the levels left behind. In a way it is like having death 
under control. One begins with the lowest levels: social circumstances, 
customs and habits; physical surroundings, the posture and the breathing of 
the body; the senses, their sensations and perceptions; the mind, its thoughts 
and feelings, until the entire mechanism of personality is grasped and firmly 
held. The final stage of meditation is reached when the sense of identity goes 
beyond the ‘I am so-and-so’, beyond ‘so I am’, beyond ‘I am the witness only’, 
beyond ‘there is’, beyond all ideas into the impersonally personal pure being. 
But you must be energetic when you take to meditation. It is definitely not a 
part-time occupation. Limit your interests and activities to what is needed 
for you and your dependents’ barest needs. Save all of your energies and time 
for breaking the wall your mind had built around you. Believe me, you will not 
regret it.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> How do I come to know that my experience is universal?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> At the end of your meditation — all is known directly, no proofs 
whatsoëver are required. Just as every drop of the ocean carries the taste of 
the ocean, so does every moment carry the taste of eternity. Definitions and 
descriptions have their place as useful incentives for further searching, but 
you must go beyond them into what is undefinable and indescribable except in 
negative terms. 

After all, even universality and eternity are mere concepts, the opposites of 
being place and timebound. Reality is not a concept, nor the manifestation of 
a concept. It has nothing to do with concepts. Concern yourself with your 
mind; remove its distortions and impurities. Once you have had the taste of 
your own self, you will find it everywhere and at all times. That is why, it 
is so important that you should come to it. Once you know it, you will never 
lose it. 

But you must give yourself the opportunity through intensive, even arduous, 
meditation.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> What exactly do you want me to do?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Give your heart and mind to brooding over the ‘I am’: what is it, 
how is it, what is its source, its life, its meaning. It is very much like 
digging a well. You reject all that is not water, till you reach the 
life-giving spring.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> How shall I know that I am moving in the right direction?</p>

<p><b>M:</b> By your progress in intentness, in clarity and devotion to the 
task.</p>

<p><b>Q:</b> We Europeans find it very difficult to keep quiet. The world is 
too much with us.</p>

<p><b>M:</b> Oh, no — you are dreamers too. We differ only in the contents of 
our dreams. You are after perfection — in the future. We are intent on finding 
it — in the *now*. Only the limited is perfectible. The unlimited is already 
perfect. You are perfect, only you don’t know it. Learn to know yourself and 
you will discover wonders. 

All you need is already within you; you must only approach your self with 
reverence and love. Self-condemnation and self-distrust are grievous errors. 
Your constant flight from pain and search for pleasure is a sign of love you 
bear for your self; all I plead with you is this: Make love of your self 
perfect. Deny yourself nothing — give your self infinity and eternity and 
discover that you do not need them; you are beyond.


<script>
export default {
  props: ["slot-key"],
  mounted () {
    tippy("[data-tippy-content]", {allowHTML: true});
  }
}
</script>